Add documentation for Data Mapper (#9)
wso2/docs-ballerina-visual-studio-code-plugin: en/docs/visual-programming/data-mapper.md

# Data Mapper

> Visual Data Mapper is a tool that allows you to visually translate data from one format to another, such as from one JSON format to another. It comes with an intuitive user interface and prevents the need of being aware of the programming logic underneath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visual Data Mapper is a tool, which allows you to visually translate data from one format to another (such as from one JSON format to another). It comes with an intuitive user interface and prevents the need of being aware of the programming logic underneath.
```

When you map data via the user interface, the Data Mapper generates the required Ballerina source code. Since the Ballerina source code is the single source of truth for the Visual Data Mapper, it also lets you open and edit existing data mappings made via the source code without changing the user experience.

## Set up the prerequisites

> 1. Install the latest versions of [Ballerina](https://ballerina.io/downloads/) and [Ballerina Visual Studio Code plugin](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=wso2.ballerina).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install the [latest Ballerina version](https://ballerina.io/downloads/) and the [Ballerina Visual Studio Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=wso2.ballerina).
```

2. Execute the command below to create a package (if you are not already working on one).
```bash
bal new convert
```
3. Open the created package in VS Code.

### Sample use case

> Let's walk through a simple use case where you will input person data and courses data in a specific structure and convert and transform those to a different format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The below is a simple use case in which you will input data of people and courses in a specific structure and convert and transform those to a different format.
```

> 4. Create three files with the sample data below in JSON format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Create three files with the sample data below in JSON format.
```

**Input 1: Person**
```json
{
    "id": "1001",
    "firstName": "Vinnie",
    "lastName": "Hickman",
    "age": 15,
    "country": "UK"
}
```
**Input 2: Course**
```json
{
    "id": "CS6002",
    "name": "Computation Structures",
    "credits": 4
}
```
**Output**
```json
{
    "id": "1001F",
    "fullName": "Vinnie Hickman",
    "age": "15",
    "courses": [
        {"title": "CS6002 - Computation Structures", "credits": 4},
        {"title": "CS6003 - Circuits and Electronics", "credits": 3},
        {"title": "CS6004 - Signals and Systems", "credits": 3}
    ],
    "totalCredits": 10,
    "visaType": "D tier-4"
}
```

## Open the Data Mapper
There are two different ways of opening the Data Mapper.

> 1. Open with the `Design` code lens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open with the `Design` code lens.
```

Add the code below to the `main.bal` file of the package to define an empty expression bodied function.

> >**Info:** The preferred way to model the transformation logic in Ballerina is via expression bodied functions. The expression bodied function below will simply return nil. The function body of it is an expression, which will return a nil value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** The preferred way to model the transformation logic in Ballerina is via expression-bodied functions. The expression-bodied function below will simply return nil. The function body of it is an expression, which will return a nil value.
```

```ballerina
function name() => ();
```

> Once you add the above function, the VS Code plugin will display a code lens called `Design` on top of the function. Click the Design code lens to go to the Data Mapper view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you add the above function, the VS Code extension will display a code lens called `Design` on top of the function. Click the **Design** code lens to go to the Data Mapper view.
```

![Open Data Mapper](img/dm-open-via-code-lens.gif "Open Data Mapper via code lens")

> 2. Open with the diagram view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Open with the Diagram View.
```

> Open the file in diagram view and click the `+` icon on the page. Then click Data Mapper in the Add Constructs pane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the file in the Diagram View and click the `+` icon on the page. Then, click **Data Mapper** in the **Add Constructs** pane.
```

![Open Data Mapper](img/dm-open-via-diagram.gif "Open Data Mapper via diagram")

## Provide inputs and output
Once the Data mapper is opened, it will prompt you to provide inputs and output of the transformation function. Inputs and the output can be any data type in Ballerina. This example converts JSON and array of JSON to JSON, and thereby, you can use Ballerina record types as inputs and output.

> In the Data Mapper form, you have several options to provide input and output records. If the records are already defined in your package, you can select one of those. If you are starting from scratch, you can either create the record from the record editor view or import a JSON to create a matching record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Data Mapper form, you have several options to provide the input and output records. If the records are already defined in your package, you can select one of those. If you are starting from scratch, you can either create the record from the Record Editor view or import a JSON to create a matching record.
```

This example imports JSON files and creates the records as shown below.

![Configure Data Mapper](img/dm-define-inputs-n-output.gif "Define Inputs and Output for Data Mapper")

> Once you defined inputs and the output types, click Save to open the mapping view. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you define the input and the output types, click **Save** to open the mapping view. 
```

> ## Do the Mappings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Define the mappings
```

> Let's see how to map fields in inputs with fields in the output JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see how to map the input fields with the fields in the JSON output.
```

> ### Basic Mapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Basic mapping
```

Map the `person id` to the `student id` as shown below.
>**Info:** The mapping view will have the **Inputs** on the left hand side of the UI and the **Output** on the right. To map the fields, click on the input field port and then, click the output field port. If the input and output fields are compatible and can be mapped directly, you will see a solid line connecting them.

![Basic Mapping](img/dm-basic-mapping.gif "Basic mapping")

### Diagnose and fix mapping errors
Use the `toBalString` lang lib function to convert the int to string as shown below.

> >**Info:** When you map the input to an output fields, some of them might not be compatible due to type mismatch. In this example, if you map the `person age` to `student` age, it will result in an error for type mismatch since the `input age` type is an integer and `output age` type is string. In this case, the Data Mapper will connect the two fields with a red line and show an alert sign. You can see the error by hovering over the alert sign. In this case, it will show `incompatible types: expected 'string', found 'int'`. To fix the error, hover over the alert sign and click `Fix by editing expression`. Then, the Data Mapper will pop out the expression editor for the specific expression. Now, you can modify the expression to return a string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** When you map the input fields to output fields, some of them might not be compatible due to type mismatch. In this example, if you map the `person age` to `student` age, it will result in an type mismatch error since the `input age` type is an integer and the `output age` type is a string. In this case, the Data Mapper will connect the two fields with a red line and show an alert sign. You can see the error by hovering over the alert sign. In this case, it will show the `incompatible types: expected 'string', found 'int'` error. To fix the error, hover over the alert sign and click **Fix by editing expression**. Then, the Data Mapper will pop out the expression editor for the specific expression. Now, you can modify the expression to return a string.
```

![Fix Errors](img/dm-fix-diagnostics.gif "Fix incompatible types error")

Once you fix the error, the connection appears in blue to indicate that there are no errors.

### Aggregate multiple input fields to one output field

> You can derive one output parameter by combining two or more input parameters. In this example, the value for the fullName output parameter is a combination the values for the firstName and lastName input parameters. You can map them as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can derive one output parameter by combining two or more input parameters. In this example, the value for the `fullName` output parameter is a combination of the values of the `firstName` and `lastName` input parameters. You can map them as shown below:
```

> >**Info:** To aggregate fields, you can map two or more fields to the same output field. The Data Mapper will automatically combine the two fields and assign it to the output field. By default, the fields will be combined with a plus operator. If you want to use a different operator or method to combine two fields, you can click on the code button and customize the expression with the expression editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** To aggregate fields, you can map two or more fields to the same output field. The Data Mapper will automatically combine the two fields and assign them to the output field. By default, the fields will be combined with a plus operator. If you want to use a different operator or method to combine two fields, you can click on the **Code** button and customize the expression with the expression editor.
```

![Concatenate](img/dm-concatination.gif "Aggregate multiple input fields")

### Map the arrays

> To convert from one array type to another, you can simply map the input array to the output array. If the arrays are compatible, they will be connected with a blue line. If they are not compatible, the connecting line will appear in red.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert from one array type to another, you can simply map the input array to the output array. If the arrays are compatible, they will be connected with a blue line. If they are incompatible, the connecting line will appear in red.
```

> >**Info:** You can use Ballerina query support to convert one array type to another. To use a query in a Data Mapper, you can select the array by clicking on it. Then, it will provide you with several buttons. Click the code action button (bulb sign) and select **Convert to query**. Then, the Data Mapper will convert the mapping to a query. Then, move into the query and do the mapping between the array types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** You can use the Ballerina query support to convert one array type to another. To use a query in the Data Mapper, you can select the array by clicking on it. Then, it will provide you with several buttons. Click the code action button (bulb sign) and select **Convert to query**. Then, the Data Mapper will convert the mapping to a query. Then, do the mapping between the query and the array types.
```

Author: Here we should mention go inside the query and do the mappings

![Convert to Query](img/dm-convert-to-query.gif "Map via query expression")

#### Further process the data
You can further process the data within the query expression. Currently, the Data Mapper supports the following intermediate clauses.

> - Where clause: filter data based on a given condition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Where` clause: filter data based on a given condition
```

> - Let clause: define local variables within the query expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Let` clause: define local variables within the query expression
```

> - Limit clause: limit the number of elements returns from the query expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Limit` clause: limit the number of elements returned from the query expression
```

> - Order by clause: sort data within the query expression in `ascending` or `descending` directions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Order by` clause: sort data within the query expression in `ascending` or `descending` order
```

> - Join clause: performs an inner or left outer join

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Join` clause: performs an inner or left outer join
```

> - Outer join clause: performs an outer join

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Outer join` clause: performs an outer join
```
Should we define the `Inner join` clause also?

Author: The `join clause` is actually performing the inner join, Fixed with 0f05ec1c9c116c20045ee1b7ec3e5bdf24ebcc92

![Further Processing](img/dm-further-processing.gif "Process via intermediate clauses")

Once array type mapping is completed, select the transform function name in the top breadcrumb bar to navigate to the root view of mapping.

### Add local variables

> You can define local variables within the transformation function and re-use in multiple places to avoid duplications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can define local variables within the transformation function and re-use them in multiple places to avoid duplications.
```

> >**Info:** If there are no existing local variables, you can open up the local variable pane by clicking on the `Add Local Variable` button. Otherwise, the defined local variables are listed down under local variables in the RHS of the UI. You will be able to access the local variable pane by clicking on the edit button there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** If there are no existing local variables, you can open up the local variable pane by clicking the **Add Local Variable** button. Otherwise, the defined local variables are listed down under **local variables** in the RHS of the UI. You will be able to access the local variable pane by clicking the **Edit** button there.
```

![Local Variable](img/dm-add-local-variable.gif "Add local variable")

### Manipulate fields without drawing connections
Click on the triple dots button at the end of the field to see the actions that can be performed for the selected field.

> #### Initialize arrays, Add and delete elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Initialize arrays, add, and delete elements
```

>**Info:** The actions are provided based on the type of the selected field. If you have click on the triple dots button of an array typed field, you will see `Initialize Array` option.

> Once the array is initialized, you can add array elements by clicking on the `+ Add Element` button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the array is initialized, you can add array elements by clicking the **+ Add Element** button.
```

> Furthermore, clicking on the triple dots button on any array element will provide option to delete that element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, clicking the triple dots button on any array element will provide the option to delete that element.
```

![Array Manipulation](img/dm-array-manipulation.gif "Manipulate arrays")

#### Add/Edit constant values/expressions 

> >**Info:** If a particular field is empty and accepting constant/expression you will see `Add value` action after clicking on the triple dots button. Click on it will open up the expression editor and there you will be able to provide a constant value or construct any complex expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** If a particular field is empty and accepting a constant/expression, you will see the **Add value** action after clicking the triple dots button. This will open up the expression editor and you will be able to provide a constant value or construct any complex expression in it.
```

Let's add hard coded visa type for the foreign students.

![Add Expression](img/dm-add-inline-expr.gif "Add expression to an output field")

> >**Info:** If a particular field is having a value, you will see `Edit value` action once you click on the triple dots button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Info:** If a particular field is having a value, you will see the **Edit value** action once you click the triple dots button.
```
